---
layout: post
title: 'An introduction to using Grommet UI with React'
date: 2020-4-10
description: 'Make your react apps beautiful and responsive, fast'
img: grommet.png
tags: [programming, terminal, bash] # add tag
---

---

## Table of Contents

- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Setting up](#setting-up)
  - [Create-React-App](#create-react-app)
  - [Clean Up](#clean-up)
  - [Add Grommet](#add-grommet)

There are many great ways to style your React applications, from classic CSS/SASS stylesheets, CSS-in-JS(such as styled components), and CSS libraries such as Tailwind or Bulma. There are also UI libraries, which provide pre-styled components for you to build your application with. Material UI, React Bootstrap, and Semantic UI are among the most popular, but lately I have really enjoyed using Grommet. Grommet is a wide library of components which brags some big name users such as Netflix and Boeing. Grommet has great theme tooling and specializes in accessible, mobile-friendly applications. In this article I will walk though building a new react app using Grommet!

## Setting up

### Create-React-App

This tutorial will be utilizing Create-React-App(CRA). Instructions for getting started with CRA can be found [here](). We will also be using npm as our package manager, but feel free to use the package manager of your choice.

```bash
create-react-app grommet-tutorial
cd grommet-tutorial
rm -rf yarn.lock
rm -rf node_modules
npm install
```

### Clean Up

Next, for the purposes of this tutorial, we will clean up some of the unnecessary files. From the 'src' directory, remove the following files:

- src/App.css
- src/App.test.js
- src/index.css
- src/logo.svg

Inside `src/index.js`, remove the import of `index.css`. Inside `src/App.js`, remove the import of the logo and `App.css`.

### Add Grommet

Next, we are going to add grommet and the accompanying icons pack to our project:

```bash
npm install grommet grommet-icons --save
```
