---
layout: post
title:  "Adding the Stripe API to your React-Rails application"
date:   2020-2-30
description: 'Part 2: Server-Side'
img: stripe.png
tags: [programming, terminal, bash] # add tag
---
---

Welcome to Part 2 of my Stripe API series for React and Rails! If you haven't yet read part one, you can find it [here](https://shanelonergan.github.io/terminal-pt-1/). In part two we will be walking through building the server-side integration of the Stripe API. In part 1, we used a Stripe Checkout to securely collect the user's payment information. This process was handled by Stripe, and returned us a Token which represents that sensitive information. Then we sent that Token to our back-end where we will actually charge the User based on their item/s. In this post we will build out that back-end functionality, and the end result will be a functional Stripe payment processing system.

## Table of Contents

- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Set Up](#set-up)
- [Front-End](#front-end)
- [Back End](#back-end)

## Set Up

First things first: we need to create a Stripe account to manage our API calls. Once you do, you can retrieve your Text API keys, which will be found on the home page under the 'Get your test APY keys' header. They can also be found on the Developer page. Once you have access to your keys, we can get started on integrating them.

## Front-End

I have found that the quickest way to get Stripe up and running on the front end is by using a great package called `react-stripe-checkout`. This is a React implementation of Stripe's [Checkout](https://stripe.com/docs/payments/checkout) feature. A Checkout creates a secure, Stripe-hosted payment page which collects all the essential information and handles it for you in one quick step. One downside of going this route is that you don't have full control of the checkout flow or style. If those are things that you value highly, you can use [Stripe Elements](https://stripe.com/docs/payments/accept-a-payment) to build a bespoke checkout experience. To get started, we need to install a few dependancies, react-stripe-checkout and dotenv:

```zsh
npm install react-stripe-checkout dotenv
```

Next we need to set up our environmental variables, if you haven't done so yet. I like to use dotenv, but you can use any method that suits you. To do this, create a `.env` file in the root of your directory. Be sure to add this file to your `.gitignore`, so that it isn't committed to your Github(link). Now you can add your Stripe api key to this env file.

Next, we want to add a Stripe Checkout component to our app. To do this, we first need to import the package like so:

```js
import StripeCheckout from 'react-stripe-checkout';
```

This gives us access to the `<StripeCheckout/>` component. This will render a styled button which, when clicked, will open up a checkout window. It can take a wide variety of props, but the only two are required: `token`, and `stripeKey`. The token prop is where we pass our callback function to handle the token we will receive, and  `stripeKey` is of course our stripe api key, which we will pull from the .env file. Once we add this component to our application, it should look something like this:

```javascript react
export default function App() {
    return (
        <StripeCheckout
            token={onToken}
            stripeKey={process.env.REACT_APP_STRIPE_KEY}
        />
    )
}
```

Now the last thing we need to do is create our `onToken` function. This function will automatically be passed the `token` prop. This token is created when the customer fills out the secure stripe payment form. It represents this sensitive information, but is safe to be sent back to us to handle, ensuring that no payment information ever touches our server. We can then send this token to our server to finish the process. For our purposes, we are going to create a Stripe `charge` using this token, which will charge the customer's credit card. A charge can be created with many different [properties](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges), but we will only use a few of them. From our front end, we will want to pass an config object containing a charge object and a price. The price should come from wherever you are storing the price of your item locally, likely in your state. It is important to note that Stripe will interpret payment amounts as the *lowest unit of the currency you are using*. We are using USD, so the lowest unit would be a cent. Thus, we need to multiply our price in dollars by 100 to get the number of cents. As for the charge, we will want to make an object containing a key of token, pointing to the ID of the token returned from our Checkout. We then want to make a fetch request to our API (which we havn't created yet), passing in our config object. Our final code for this onToken method should like something like this:

```js
const onToken = (token) => {

    const charge = {
        token: token.id
    };

    const config = {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        },
        body: JSON.stringify({ charge: charge, price: price * 100 })
    };

    fetch(CHARGES_URL, config)
    .then(res => res.json())
    .then(console.log)
}
```

## Back End

- dotenv
- cors
- charge controller
- route
- params
